Lust. Attraction, Attachment: Three Brain Systems for Love 

  The sex drive (libido or lust) is characterized by the craving for sexual gratification; it is often dir~cted toward many partners. In mammals, the sex drive is associated primarily witb the estrogens and androgens; in humans, Ihe androgens, particularly testosterone, are central to sexual desire in both men and women (Sherwin, 1994; Van Goozen, Wieganr, Endert, Helmond, and Van de Poll, I997). 

 
Attraction (the mammalian/avian counterpart to human romantic love) is characterized by increased energy, focused attention on a specific mate, obsessive following, affiliative gestures, possessive mate-guarding, and motivation to win a preferred mating panner (Fisher, Aron, Mashek, Strong, Li, and Brown, 2002, 2002.a; Fisher, 2004). In humans, the developed form of animal attraction is known as romantic love, obsessive love, passionate love, or being in love. Recent data suggest this brain system is primarily associated with elevated activity of dopamine in the reward pathways of the brain. Most likely it is also associaled with elevated activity of central norepinephrine and suppressed activity of central serotOnin, as well as other brain systems acting together to produce the range of emotions, motivations, cognitions, and behaviors common to romantic love (Fisher, 1998, 2004; Fisher et aI., 2002, 1.002a). 

Attachment is characterized in birds and mammals by mutual territory defense and/or nest-building, mutual feeding and grooming, maintenance of close proximity, separation anxiety, shared parental chores, and affiliative behaviors (Carter, DeVries, Taymans, Roberrs, Williams, and Gerz, 1997; Lim, Murphy, and Young, 2.004; Lim and Young, 1.004). In humans, parrner attachment is known as companionate love (Hatfield, 1988, p. 191). Human attachment is associated with the above mammalian traits, as well as feelings of calm. security, social comfort, and emotional union with a long-term mate. Animal studies suggest this brain system is associated primarily with oxytocin and vasopressin in the nucleus accumbens and ventral pallidurn, respectively (Lim et aI., 2.004; Lim and Young, 1.004). 

Each of these primary brain systems evolved to playa different role in counship, mating, reproduction, and parenting (Fisher, 1998, 1.004; Fisher et al., 2001., 1.oo2.a). The sex drive evolved to motivate our ancestors to seek coitus with a range of appropriate partners. Attraction (and its developed human form, romantic love) evolved to motivate individuals to select among potential mates, prefer a panicular individual, :lnd focus courtship attention on this favored mating partner, thereby conserving counship time and energy. Attachment evolved primarily to motivate individuals to sustain an affiliative connection with this reproductive parmer at least long enough to complete species-specific parental duries. Moreover, rhese three brain systems interact in myriad ways to direct many behaviors, emotions, and motivations associated with human reproduction. 