  To investigate the biology of romantic love in humans, I and my colleagues Lucy 1. Brown of the Alben Einstein College of Medicine, Arthur Aeon of SUNY Stony Brook, and Stony Brook graduate students Greg Strong and Debra Mashek embarked on a neuroimaging study of men and women who had "just fallen madly in love" (Fisher et aI., 2.003; Aeon, Fisher, Mashek, Strong, Li, and Brown, 2005). My hypothesis was that this phenomenon was associated with elevated activity of central dopamine and! or norepinephrine and low activity of central serotonin (Fisher, 1998). 
Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRlj, we collected data on ten women and seven men who reported being in love an average of 7.4 months (median 7; range I-I? months); they ranged in age from eighteen to rwenty-six. Each subject looked at a photograph of his or her beloved as well as a photograph of an emotionally neutral acquaintance, each viewing followed by a distraction task to cleanse the mind of strong emotion. This distraction task consisted of mentally counting backward from a large number, such as 9,471, in increments of seven. The protocol consisted of (I) positive stimulus (thirty seconds); (2) counting task (forry seconds); (3) neutral stimulus (thirry seconds); (4) counting task (twenry seconds). This process (or its reverse) was repeated six times; the experiment lasted abour twelve minutes. 
Group activation specific to the beloved occurred in several regions. Most significant was activiry in the tight ventral tegmental area (VTA) and right postero-dorsal body and dorsal tail of the caudate nucleus (Fisher, Aran, Mashek, Strong, Li, and Brown, 2003; Aron er aI., 2005). The region activated in the VfA is rich in cells that produce and distribute dopamine to many brain regions, including the caudate nucleus. Moreover, the VTA is central to the brain's "reward system" (Schultz, 2.000; Martin-Soekh, Leenders, Chevalley, Missimer, Kunig, Magyar, Mino, and Schultz, 2001; Breiter, Gollub, Weisskoff, Kennedy, Makris, Berke, Goodman, Kantor, Gastfriend, Riorden, Mathew, Roscn, and Hyman, 1997), the neural network associated with sensations of pleasure, general arousal, focused attention, and motivation to pursue and acquire rewards (Schultz, 2.000; Delgado, Nystrom, Fissel, Noll, and Fiez, 2.000; Elliott, Newman, Longe, and Deakin, 2.003). The caudate nucleus is also associated with motivation and goal-oriented 
91. Biological Theorifi 
behaviors; it, roo, is central ro the dopaminergic reward system (MartinSoelch et aI., 1.001; Schultz, z.eee). 
Using fMRJ, Bartels and Zeki also investigated brain activity in seventeen men and women who reporred being "truly, deeply, and madly in love" (2000, p. 381.9). However, in this study, individuals reponed being in love an average of 28.8 months, considerably longer. These subjects were less intensely in love. This was established (serendipitously) because both our participants and Barrels and Zeki's participants were administered the same questionnaire, the Passionate Love Scale (Hatfield and Sprecher, 1986), prior to scanning. Bartels and Zeki (2.000, 2004) also found activation in a region of the dorsal caudate nucleus and the ventral tegmental arca. 
The above data suggest that the focused attention, motivation, and goaloriented behaviors characteristic of romantic love are associated with elevated activity of central dopamine. Because specific activities of dopamine arc also associated with ecstasy, intense energy, sleeplessness, mood swings, emotional dependence, and craving (see Fisher, 1998), dopamine most likely also contributes to these aspects of romamic love. 
Elevated activity of norepinephrine and low activity of central serotonin may also be involved, although I have only corollary evidence at present. Norepinephrine is associated with a pounding heart, elevated blood pressure, and other physiological responses of the sympathetic nervous system, phenomena common to romantic love (Fisher, 1998, 1.004). And scientists have recently studied concentrations of serotonin lransporter in blood platelets of sixty individuals: twenty had fallen in love in the previous six months; (Wenry suffered from unmedicated obsessive-eompulsive disorder (OCD); twenry normal (comrol) individuals were not in love (Marazziti, Akiskal, Rossi, and Cassano, 1999). Both the in-love participants and those suffering from OCD showed significantly lower concentations of the platelet serotonin transporter. Thus decreased activity of bodily (and perhaps also brain) serotonin most likely contributes to the lover's obsessive thinking and impulsivity. 