The Drive to Love 
Psychologists distinguish berween emotions and motivations, which are brain systems oriented around planning and pursuit of a specific want or need. Arthur Aron had proposed that romantic love is nor an emotion but a motivation system designed 10 enable suitors to build and maintain an intimate relationship with a preferred mating partner (Aron and Aton, 199 J; Aron et al.. 1995). Because (he above-mentioned experiments indicate 
that this passion is associated with activity in the VfA and caudate nucleus, Awn's hypothesis is most likely correct: motivation and goal~oriented behaviors form the core of romantic love. These findings then suggested to me that romantic love is a primary motivation system-a fundamental mating drive (Fisher, 2.004). 
Donald Pfaff defines a drive as a neural state that energizes and directs behavior to acquire a particular biological need to survive or reproduce (Pfaff, 1999. PP' 7, 40). Romantic love shares many traits with basic drives: 
(I) Like all drives, romantic anraction is tenacious; emotions dissipate or change far more rapidly. (2.) Romantic love is focused on a specific reward (the beloved); emotions, such as joy and disgust, are focused on a range of phenomena instead. (3) This passion is not associated with any particular facial expression, while all of the primary emotions have characterisric facial poses. (4) Like all drives, romantic love is exceedingly difficult to control; it is harder to curb thirst. for example, than anger. (5) And, like all of the basic drives (Pfaff, T999). romamic love is associated with elevated activity of centraJ dopamine. 
Drives lie along a continuum (Fisher, 2.004). Some, such as thirst and the need for warmrh, can rarely be extinguished until satisfied, while the sex drive and the maternal instinct can often be redirected. Falling in love appears to be near the base of this continuum. For example, romantic love is considerably stronger than the sex drive. Few people whose sexual advances are rejected proceed to kill themselves or someone else, whereas rejected lovers in cultures around the world commit suicide or homicide; many more become depressed. In a study of r 14 Americans who had been romantically rejected in the past eight weeks, 40 percenr were clinically depressed; 12. percent suffered moderate to severe depression (Mearns, 1991). Since romantic love is a universal and powerful human mating drive, it must have evolved. 
Evolution of Romantic Love: The Brain Network for "Mate Choice" 
   Ever since Darwin (1859, 1871) proposed the concept of sexual selection to explain patterns of sexual dimorphism in birds and mammals, scientists have been describing physical and behavioral traits that birds and mammals have evolved to attract potential mates (Andersson, 1994; Miller, 2.000). The peacock's tail feathers are the standard example. But the corresponding brain mechanism by which the display chooser responds to these traits, comes to prefer a specific individual, and focuses his or her courtship 
94 Biological Theories 
time aod energy 00 this particular canspecific has nOl been defined (Fisher et ai., 2002, 2002a; Fisher, 2004). 
Yet all birds and mammals express mate preferences; none copulate in· discriminately. The phenomenon of mate choice is so common in nature that the ethological literature regularly uses several terms to describe it, including "individual preference," "favoritism," "female choice," "sexual choice, ,. "selective proceptivity," and "attraction." In most mammalian and avian species this mate preference is brief. In rats, for example, counship attraction often lasts seconds; among elephants, it lasts three to five days; among faxes, it lasts about two weeks (Fisher, 2004). But all species display similar characteristics of atrraction. Among these traits, attracted individuals focus their attention on a preferred mating panner and express heightened energy, obsessive following, sleeplessness, loss of appetite, possessive mateguarding, affiliative courtship gestures such as patting, stroking, and nuzzling, goal-oriented courtship behaviors, and intense motivation to win this particular individual (see Fisher, 2004). All these traits are also characteristic of human romantic love. Moreover, many creatures express th..is attraction instantly, what may he the forerunner of human "love at first sight." 
Animal studies indicate that this mate preference (or attraction) is associared with elevated activities of central dopamine, another similarity with human romantic love. When a female lab-raised prairie vole is mated with a male, she forms a distinct preference for him associated with a 50 percent increase of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens, a region of the brain's reward system (Gingrich, Liu, Cascio, Wang, and Insel, 2000). When a dopamine antagonist is injected into (he accumbens, rhe female no longer prefers this partner. And when a female is injected with a dopamine agonist, she begins to prefer the conspecific who is present at the time of infusion, even if she has not mated with this male (Gingrich et aI., 2000; Wang, Yu, Cascio, Liu, Gingrich, and [nsel, (999). An increase in central dopamine is also associated with mate artraction i.n female sheep (Fabre-Nys, 1998). 
This mammalian (and avian) attraction system most likely evolved for the same adaptive reason it evolved in humans: to enable individuals ro prefer specific mating partners, thereby conserving valuable courtship time and energy (Fisher, 1998, 2004; Fisher et aI., 2002., 2002a). Then, at some point in hominid evolution. this mammalian neural mechanism for mate preference developed into human romantic love. Perhaps this process initially began as early as 3.5 million years ago, along with the evolution of hominid pair-bonding (Fisher, 1992.; Reno, Meindl, McCollum, and Lovejoy, 2003), then starred to take its developed human form some two million years ago 
as the brain began to exhibit some characteristically human traits (Fisher, 2°°4)· 