Biology of Romantic Rejection 
 To understand the range of emotions, motivations, and behaviors associated with human romantic love, my colleagues and I conducted a second fMRI study, this one of romantic rejection. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study ten women and five men who were still very much in love but had recently been rejected by their romantic partner (Fisher et aI., 2005). We employed the same protocol as with our happily in love subjects. Rejected participants alternately viewed a photograph of their abandoning beloved and a photograph of a familiar, emotionally neutral individual, interspersed with a distraction attention task. 
Preliminary analysis of the positive-neutral contrast showed significant group effects in the right nucleus accumbens/ventral putamenlpal1idum,lat~ eral orbitofrontal cortex, and anterior insular/operculum cortex (Fisher et aI., 2005). 
Other studies have shown that the nucleus accumbens/ventral palliduml putamen region where we found activity becomes more active as an indi~ vidual chooses a high-risk investment associated with big gains or big losses (Kuhnen and Knutson, 2005) or anticipates a monetary reward (Zald, Boileau, EI~Dearedy, Gunn, McGlone, Dichter, and Dagher, 2004). This region is also part of the dopaminergic reward system (Gingrich, Liu, Cascio, Wang, and lnsel, 2000). The region of the anterior insula/operculum cortex where we found activity has been associated with skin and muscle pain and anxiety (Schreckenberger, Siessmeier, Vierrmann, Landvogt, Buchholz, Rolke, Treede, and Bartenstein, 2005). The region of the orbitofrontal cortex where we found activity hasbeen associated with "theory of mind" (Vollm, Taylor, Richardson, Corcoran, Stirling, McKie, Deakin, and Elliott, 2006), the human ability to muse on the thoughts and intentions of others; this brain region is also associated with evaluating punishers (Kringelbach and Rolls, 2oo4), implementing appropriate adjustments in behavior (Ridderinkhof, Van den Wildenberg, Segalowitz, and Carter, 2004), obsessive! compulsive behaviors (Evans, Lewis, and lobst, 2004), and controlling anger (Goldstein, Alai~Klein, Leskovjan, Fowler, Wang, Gur, Hitzemann, and Volkow, 2005). 
These results suggest that the dopaminergie reward system remains active in recently romantically rejected men and women, but the precise location 
96 Biological Theories 
of activity differs. These preliminary results also suggest that neural regions associated with taking risks for big gains or losses, physical pain, obsessive! compulsive behaviors, ruminating on the intentions and actions of the re· jecrer, evaluating options, and emotIOn regulation increase their activity when someone is rejected by a beloved. 
Ours is the second investigation of romantic rejection. Najib and colleagues (2004) studied nine women who were "actively grieving" a recent romantic breakup. Preliminary comparisons uncovered no commonalities; in fact. in several regions where we found activations, they found deacti· varions. Because our subjects regularly reported anger and hope for reconcili:nion, while the subjects in the Najib et al. study more regularly reponed acceptance of the situation, I suspect that our participants wefe in the initial Stage of romantic rejection, the protest phase, while their participants were in the subsequent resignation/despair phase. 
Protest: The Initial Stage of Romantic Rejection 
   Lewis, Amini, and Lannon divide romantic rejection into two general phases: protest and resignation/despair (:z.ooo). During the protest phase, abandoned lovers express intense energy, heightened alereness, (md extreme motivation to win back their beloved. These psychiatrists theorize that this "protest response" evolved from a basic mammalian reaction 10 the rupture of any social tie. Moreover, they suggest that this protest response is asso· eiated with elevated activity of dopamine and norepinephrine, reasoning that these neurotransmitters most likely produce the heightened alertness, energy, and motivation that abandoned Cteatures exhibit as they call for help and search for their abandoner, generatly their morher. 
Our data on rejected lovers is preliminary evidence that the hypothesis of Lewis, Amini, and Lannon is correct: elevated activity in dopaminergic reward pathways are likely to be involved in the initial protest phase of fa· mantic rejection. Our results may ~t1so help explain "ftustration aurac· cion"-why disappointed lovers begin to Jove their rejecting partner even more passionately (Fisher 2.004). When a reward is delayed in coming, reward·expecting neurons prolong their activity (Schultz, 2.000) and activity of the dopaminergic rewatd system is associated with feelings of intense romantic love. This phenomenon of frustration attraC[ion appears to be mal· adaptive, but the intense energy, focused attention, extreme motivation, and goal-oriented behaviors chat dopamine produce are useful biological tools for regaining a beloved (Fisher, 2004). 
During the protest stage, rejected lovers often also experience "abandon
The Drive to LOlle 97 
ment rage" (MelD}', 1998, 1999}, another trair thar may be linkt·J to the dopamioergic reward system. The primary rage S}'stt:n1 has pathwilYs to regions in the prefrontal cortex th:u anticipate rewards (Pankst'pp, r9981, and animal studies indie;)te that rhese reward and rage circuits are closely connected. For example, wh"'ll }'ou per a cat, it exprt!Oscs pleasure; when you withdraw the stimulation, it often bites (Panksepp, J')'::!8). a response to unfulfilled expectations known as "frusTr:uion aggression." The data 00 our rejected lovers suggests one of the neural regions linked \0 this rage respOllse, a re~ion of the laref31 orbirofromal corttx associated with controlling anger. 
These fMRI data on romanttc reJection also ,~uggcst that Ihe brain mechanisms for abandonment rage and romantic love ~:an u~rate in tandem, biological data that corroborates current behavioral research. Ellis and Malamuth 12000) report that rejecred men and women \.:an be furious <ll a rejecting panner. while still being very much in love with him or her. Moreover, love and hate/ragt': have several behavioral similariTies, including focused attention. obsessive dunking, heightened energy, and intense emotion, motivarion, and craving tFisher. 2004)' So these data indi..:atc that the opposite of love is nOI hare; more likely it is indifferencc. Like frustration attraction, abandonment mgc ::Ippears to be m;lbdaptivc. It stresses the heart. raiS('s blood pressure, and suppresst's the immune system (Dozier, 2.002). But it probably evolved !O enable jilted lovers to depart a dead-end relationship faSter: this way they could renew cOllrt!Ohip !Oooner, a reproducrive advantage (Fisher, 2004). Abandonment rage also motivates people to fight for the welfare of their offspring, as seen so ofren during divorce pro
ceeding~ (Fisher, 2004). 
Resignation/Despair: The Second Stage of Romantic Rejection 
 The seccmd geIleral phase of romantic rejection, resignation/despair, may be .Jssociated with reduced acti\'iry in subcortic31 dopamincrgi<; pathways. I hYP(l[hc~ize this for rhree re::lsans. First, :l prim:lte study indicates that when a monkey realizes an expected reward will never come. dop3rnine-making ceJls in tile midbrain decrease rheir activity (Schullz, 2000), Second, rhe Dlher recent fMRl investigation, of women suffering from 3 reCent romantic breakup (Najlb el ::II.. 2004, p. 22.53), reports decreased activit}" in parts of the dorsal caudate, a br:lin region rich in receptor sites for dopamine. La~l, long-term stress S'Jppresses rhe activity of dopamine and other monoammes. producing lethargy. despoodem:y, and 